In this lecture, you'll learn about the Domain Name System, DNS.
So we're back to the OSI
stack here again,
and when a sender composes the packet, starts off with Layer 7, the Application Layer, it puts that information
in there. That then gets encapsulated with the Presentation Layer information,
then the Session Layer information,
and then we get down to Layer 4, where we start getting interested as network engineers, the Transport
Layer. The packet will get encapsulated with the Layer 4 header, which includes information like,
is it TCP or UDP,
and the port number. For example, port 80 for HTTP web traffic.
Then we encapsulate that with the Layer 3 header, which is the IP header, and in that layer, the sender
has to put on the source and the destination IP address.
Now with some applications, it will actually put the IP address directly in there, but quite often,
it will use an FQDN, a Fully Qualified Domain Name, such as www.cisco.com, and that FQDN has
to be resolved to an IP address that we can put into the packet.
So, that is where DNS comes in. The Domain Name System resolves that FQDN, the Fully Qualified Domain
Name, such as www.cisco.com, to an IP address.
Enterprises will typically have an internal DNS Server or a cluster of internal DNS Servers, which will
resolve the IP addresses of their internal hosts.
For example, if I was working for an enterprise called www.flackbox.com, we would have our own internal
DNS Server, which would be responsible for resolving all hosts that were in the www.flackbox.com domain.
However, that internal DNS Server, it can't know about everything on the entire Internet.
It can't have the entire database there. So for anything external,
it's going to need to forward those requests onto an external public DNS Server.
DNS requests are sent using UDP port 53, and that can failover to TCP on port 53, but normally, it's
going to use UDP.
Let's have a look at how DNS works in the lab. So to do that, I'm going to open up a command prompt here.
So, this is on my Windows host. I'll enter CMD, and I'll do a 'ipconfig /all', and you can see on
the interface I'm using for the lab, my IP address is 172.23.1.10.
It's a /24, and my default gateway,
the router, is at 172.23.1.254. My DNS Server
is at 172.23.4.1, and the DNS domain that I am a part of is
FlackboxA.lab.
So, let's have a look at the DNS Server next.
I'm using a Windows Server as my DNS Server,
so let's have a look in Server Manager.
I can click on Tools and then open up DNS, and you can see that the server here is authoritative for
the domain flatboxA.lab.
And if I click on that, you see that I've already set up address records for some hosts in there.
So, the host EngineeringA is at 172.23.6.10, EngineeringB is at 172.23.6.11, LinuxA is at
172.23.4.2, etc., and all these hosts are in the FlackboxA.lab domain.
If this DNS Server received a request for an FQDN that was in a different domain, it would need to
forward that out to public DNS. To configure that,
if I right-click on the server up on the top left here and then go Properties, and Forwarders,
I don't actually have any configured here, but I would just edit this, and I would put in the IP address
of a public DNS server in here.
Okay, so that's the DNS setup.
If I come back to my local host now, and I can do an 'nslookup' for the host of LinuxA,
and you see, it will take a second, and then my DNS server is 172.23.4.1,
the one I just showed you, and it's resolved LinuxA.FlackboxA.lab
to 172.23.4.2.
And if I ping LinuxA,
then the ping works just fine because it was able to resolve it. So I'll be able to ping that host either
by its FQDN, its hostname, or by its IP address.
Okay, so that's how DNS works in a Windows environment.
Let's have a look at DNS on our Cisco routers next.